today on this episode of the crossover
we will be discussing cancer as a
metabolic disease with professor of
biology at boston college and
best-selling author dr thomas seyfried
find out how metabolism and diet play a
fundamental role in the origin
management and prevention of cancer
much more on this episode of the
crossover
good afternoon everyone
will be talking with professor thomas
safrey today about
cancer as a metabolic disease
thank you very much uh for the invite to
this uh to this interview
no of course listen it's a it's a real
pleasure to have you on professor i'm
gonna do a brief introduction just while
everyone's logging on uh we have the
pleasure of speaking with professor
thomas seyfried today
uh he's a world-renowned cancer
metabolic expert uh he is professor of
biology at boston college and
best-selling author of the book cancer
as a metabolic disease the origin
management and prevention of cancer
he received his phd in genetics and
biochemistry from the university of
illinois
he completed his undergraduate work the
university of new england where he was
recently
nominated as a distinguished alumni
achievement award and he won that
he also holds a master's degree in
genetics from illinois state university
and was a postdoctoral fellow at yale
where he stayed on in the department of
neurology afterwards of note professor
seyfried also served with distinction in
the us army's first cavalry division
during the vietnam war and received
numerous medals
uh he has numerous other awards from
various institutions including the
american oil chemist society the
national institutes of health the
american society for neurochemistry and
the american epilepsy
epilepsy society
he has served as chair on the scientific
advisory committee for the national tay
sachs association and his groundbreaking
work on cancer has led to over 180
peer-reviewed publications he also
recently received a lifetime achievement
award from the academy of integrative
medicine
and he serves on multiple editorial
boards and here to he's here today to
discuss cancer as a metabolic disease
super interesting topic i've known about
it for a while but really delved into it
in the last week or two and pleasure to
talk to you today about this
super interesting hypothesis oh well
thank you very much uh it's it's great
to be here and have the opportunity to
uh to address issues and discuss the
depths of these new concepts
awesome so let's just start by by going
over some basics what is the definition
of cancer in your opinion and the
globally accepted version
well i guess if you look into the
college textbook or cell biology book
it's a very simple cell division out of
control
is basically the definition of cancer
dysregulated cell growth cell division
out of control
is basically what cancer is
and what do we know about the processes
that lead to malignant
transformation of these cells right
cells go from from dividing normally and
then apoptosis which is where they die
off normally
and then in certain subpopulations they
become malignant words unregulated what
do we currently know about that process
yeah well when we look into um
uh the origin
of cancer as we know that um
albert saint-gyorgy called it the
oncogenic paradox
you know like how many different
provocative agents could elicit a cancer
uh and what was missing was a common
pathophysiological mechanism uh that
could account for how a cell that is
under growth regulation could fall back
and become dysregulated in growth
and uh what all cancers at least all the
major cancers that i've looked at under
the uh with electron microscopy
evaluations
they all have abnormalities in the
number structure and function of
mitochondria to some to some degree uh
or another regardless of what kind of a
cancer it is
so so what happens then is that a
gradual disruption of oxidative
phosphorylation
uh leads to a gradual compensatory
fermentation mechanism so cancer could
be initiated by
carcinogens and you know
intermittent hypoxia various oncogenic
viruses rare inherited mutations any
number of different things but they all
impact uh directly on the mitochondria
chronic chronically any acute damage to
the mitochondria of a cell will kill the
cell through an apothec mechanism
however they bypass that only because
they shift their metabolism to a
fermentation metabolism
and that uh allows them to be resistant
to
further growth control it's important to
uh remember and recognize that the
mitochondria controls the cell signaling
cycle of the cyclins and the growth
regulation of the cell through a number
of different interconnect connected
mechanisms so what happens is when that
organelle loses its ability
to control the energy within the cell
these cells fall back on ancient
pathways that were existing on the
planet for all organisms before oxygen
came into the atmosphere some 2.5
billion years ago so these cells are
doing nothing more than falling back on
ancient pathways
uh driven by fermentation metabolism and
uh they lose their growth control and
any number of provocative agents uh
could elicit this uh this process
so just to kind of kind of dumb it down
just for the lay person
cancer cells derive energy in a very
different way than normal tissue cells
what is a two or three sentence summary
of how a cancer cell gets energy versus
a normal cell
cancer cell normal cells uh let's put it
first let's look at the normal cell uh
the normal cells in our body derive
most of their energy through oxidative
phosphorylation
uh through the electron transport chain
in the inner membrane of the
mitochondria so we breathe the bottom
line is we breathe air every day we're
all breathing
uh every breath that we take in brings
oxygen into our system uh we make energy
in the mitochondria
normally and the waste products are
basically co2 and water are the waste
products of
oxidative phosphorylation generating
energy very efficient process
cancer cells on the other hand don't
have that available
so they have gradually upregulated these
ancient pathways of fermentation
so they they you they develop energy
through what we call substrate level
phosphorylation and that could occur
through the glycolytic pathway at the
pyruvate kinase step or
which we have now defined as the real
origin of energy is through
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation
this is through the glutaminolysis
pathway so that's where the energy comes
cancer cells have a
a ravenous appetite for glutamine and
it's the glutamine
that generates the energy
in the mitochondria but not through
oxidative phosphorylation so the glucose
carbons are used mostly for biomass in
other words you have to have the raw
materials to grow and the energy is
coming largely through
uh a fermentation an amino acid
glutamine fermentation mechanism in the
mitochondria
now the other interesting concept was
the fact that cancer for the most part
many people view it as a genetic disease
right you have mutations these mutations
lead to issues and then they kind of
multiply over time
is cancer primarily a metabolic disease
or is it a genetic disease is it both
what's the cause what's the effect
well
it's it's primarily a mitochondrial
metabolic disease you have in the same
cancer cell you have uh a plethora of
mutations in the nucleus you know some
of these are passengers drivers there's
a whole litany of different kinds of
names for the mutations that you find in
the nucleus of cancer cells
and then of course there are some cancer
cells that have been looked at in depth
but they can't find any mutation so
those are generally not discussed
uh in any in any significant way
on the other hand within the same cell
you also have defects in the cytoplasm
and that defect is in the mitochondria
so you have two fundamental organelles
prime organelles in the cell that have
defects you have mutations in the
nucleus and you have abnormalities in
the cytoplasm in the mitochondria
the question is what what is the what is
the cause
and what is the effect
so so those experiments have been done
quite convincingly repeated numerous
times in a variety of model systems and
across
uh a variety of different experimental
designs
and that is we know normal cells
give rise to normal cells that are
growth regulated and we know that cancer
cells give rise to cancer cells uh which
are growth dysregulated so that the
prime phenotype we're looking at here is
growth dysregulation or unregulated cell
growth so the question becomes is it the
mutations in the nucleus or is it the
defect in the cytoplasm that underlies
growth dysregulation so that's been
directly studied by
if you take the um the nucleus from the
tumor cell that has all the mutations
and transplant that nucleus into a into
a normal cytoplasm with normal
mitochondria the the cells that are
produced are growth regulated they're
not growth dysregulated despite the
presence of the nucleus that contains
the mutations and this was done in frogs
and humans hybrid cells and and mouse
cells
um a variety of organisms so you re you
re-establish growth regulation
uh in cells with normal mitochondria
despite the pres the continued presence
of a nucleus full of various kinds of
mutations on the other hand
if the nucleus of a normal cell is
implanted into the cytoplasm of a tumor
cell this was done by israel and shaffer
quite a quite a number of years ago you
either get dead cells or cells that
become growth uh dysregulated
so um so consequently what these what
these these are the most profound
experiments that exclude cancer at being
a genetic disease it cannot be a genetic
disease so the the question then is
where
where do all these mutations come from
and what do they do
uh basically they're downstream effects
of disturbed energy metabolism so when
the when the mitochondria becomes
defective gradually over protracted
period they they throw out rot ros
reactive oxygen species which are
carcinogenic and mutagenic so the
mutations in the nucleus of these tumor
cells and i'm talking about all the
different kinds of tumor cells are
basically downstream effects of
disturbed energy metabolism so the
origin of cancer is damage to oxidative
phosphorylation
linked to a compensatory fermentation
with many different def like many of the
hallmarks of cancer put out by hannah
hannah weinberg are all downstream
epiphenomena of the of the original
damage to oxidative phosphorylation
now how does that play a role with um
telomerase telomerase is clearly
involved in tumor progression how does
mitochondrial function
uh dovetail with telomerase activity
well yeah well telomerase is usually
activated in cancer cells it's linked to
the energetic state of the cell from
what we can see
so um it's usually high in cells that
ferment or rapidly uh dysregulated
growth it's much lower activity in
in resting cells normal cells of the
body
um but the issue here we have to look at
is this the cancer cell cannot survive
uh without fermentable fuels
so if you target and restrict the
availability of the fermentable fuels
the cell will die
uh regardless of what the telomerase
activity is so telomerase activity is
another phenotype that's downstream of
the of the damage to the most of the
stuff that people study are all
downstream effects of a fundamental
disturbance in energy metabolism
so let me go over two of those that are
very highly focused on
angiogenesis which is the creation of
new blood vessels and the evasion of
apoptosis those are obviously both
downstream
and
what is the hypothesis as to why those
occur with a disturbed mitochondrial
function
yeah so that's excellent these are great
uh points because a lot of people need
to need to know these connections
and and you know basically when you lose
mitochondrial function uh there's a
retrograde signaling system
from the from the mitochondria to the
nucleus and what and what it says to the
nucleus is that we'll start we're
suffocating uh and the nucleus then uh
goes through uh uh they up regulate a
number of transcription factors one of
which is if one alpha you know uh
hypoxia inducible factor uh alpha it's
always produced and it's always degraded
very rapidly but under hypoxic
conditions or conditions where oxfos is
dysfunctional it becomes stabilized and
hif is a transcription factor for a
variety of different genes the
glycolytic pathway also vascular
endothelial growth factor which is the
factor that
drives angiogenesis
so that uh vegf is under the control of
hif1 alpha if one alpha is up regulated
as the result of dista disturbed energy
metabolism so you can see the linkage
the you know disturbed energy metabolism
mitochondria stress response to the
nucleus nucleus stabili up regulates and
stabilizes hif one alpha through the
pyrohydroxylase activity operating up
regulating glycolysis vascular
endothelial growth factor and abnormal
blood vessels as far as apoptosis is
concerned the mitochondria is the kill
switch of the cell it controls apoptosis
and when it loses its ability to control
uh regulated energy metabolism the the
cell bypasses the the kill switch is now
broken and the cell bypasses apoptosis
so again it comes right back to the
disturbance and energy metabolism within
the mitochondria
now what about
metastatic disease cancer spreading
throughout the body i was reading a
bunch on this and trying to figure out
how to relate and it seems like they
were able to correlate
metastatic phenomenon with disturbed
mitochondrial function is that true
yeah uh well you have to also look at
the biology of the problem so the
question is you know what how does the
metastatic cancer cell differ from the
non-metastatic cancer cell because
there's a lot of tumor cells stem cells
and all kinds of different cells they
grow like crazy
very fast very rapid but they don't
metastasize um you know they can kill by
by mass effects uh they can be very
angiogenic but they don't spread
so the question is what is the
difference between the neoplastic cell
that grows rapidly versus the neoplastic
cell that doesn't grow so rapidly but
has the capacity
to uh enter and exit tissues suppress
the immune system
and uh just take up residence in
different parts of the body and we and
others have shown that this cell is
actually of a mesenchymal cell of
macrophage origin
and how this happens is intriguing it
was originally pointed out by akil back
in 1902
0102 he says there's a fusion
hybridization between
parts of our immune system to try to
heal cancer cancer is also often viewed
as an unhealed wound so uh cells of our
immune system come into this wound to
put out the fire and try to heal the
disturbance which is lactic acid being
thrown out it looks like a wound and in
their ability to heal the wound they
fuse with some of these non-metastatic
neoplastic cells and you have this
hybrid cell which which now has a
genetic care because macrophages already
have the genetic capability of uh
entering and exiting tissues
in survival in the bloodstream i mean
there are
protectors of our body against bacterial
infections so what happens we get a
fusion hybridization now you have a cell
that is genetically programmed to move
in and out of tissues and spread around
the body but it's growth dysregulated so
it has a dysregulated cell growth and uh
and this is the origin now what we did
is we went through all the major cancers
that are known to be metastatic and
every one of them express
characteristics of macrophages so so
it's very clear
that if you have glioblastoma if you
have lung cancer all of these different
cancers have many mesenchymal features
and they can come from the from fusion
with the local macro fact like microglia
or or um you know for cells in the liver
uh you can have alveolar macrophage all
of the metastatic invasive cells have
characteristics of macrophage and their
growth dysregulated and they suppress
the immune system and it makes it very
difficult however we know that they like
all other cancers are driven by
fermentation glucose and glutamine so it
becomes very easy i wouldn't say easy
but it becomes very clear to how to kill
them and get rid of them so once you
understand the biology of the problem
the strategies for managing these
diseases it becomes much much clearer
much more clear
now what about viruses right viruses
have been shown to correlate with
certain cancers in your opinion how does
viral infection
ultimately lead to mitochondrial
dysfunction
yeah well it's good uh there's there's
several different mechanisms that have
been already uh discussed and published
uh a virus they're called oncogenic
viruses as opposed to some some other
kinds of viruses you know some of them
are are facilitators of neoplasia
directly causing cancer some of those uh
some of them participate indirectly and
in facilitating the growth of the tumor
so like papilloma viruses or hepatitis c
viruses which are which are origins of
cancer they actually the viral particles
themselves or products of the viral
genome enter the mitochondria and
disturb oxidative phosphorylation in
only those cells that are prone to be
infected uh by the virus like
hepatocytes in the liver or various
types of epithelial cells in in
sex organs and things like this
papilloma viruses uh yeah these kinds
and and so we know that they are
gradually disturbing energy metabolism
of population
populations of cells then there are
other like human cytomegaloviruses which
actually once the cell is transformed
uh
they enter the cell and they actually
act as
turbochargers for using glucose and
glutamine more more aggressively so the
virus particles can uh uh
drive cancer in a number of different
ways they can be the origin through
defect through damage to oxfords or they
can be superchargers and getting the
cancer cell to grow even faster by
upregulating the ability to use glucose
the two fermentable fuels that drive
most if not all cancers
now let's get into the real kind of
interesting topic which is
if you view cancer as a metabolic
disease which clearly you've shown
that's the case
how does that ultimately impact cancer
management and cancer treatment and
prevention do you believe that
doctors should be advocating to starve
the cancer cells and and i use that term
meaning that these cancer cells rely on
a certain energy source and if we
deprive them are we able to better
manage cancer in your opinion
yeah that's that's the clear uh strategy
um
uh i guess we could use the term
starve or deprive um because we and
others have found i mean we know that uh
no cancer cell can survive without
glucose and glutamine i mean some cancer
cells use glutamine a little bit more
than glucose and other cancer cells you
glucose a little bit more than glutamine
but together those two fuels are very
powerful uh synergistic
metabolites so the strategy
for managing most if not all cancers is
is to use
drugs and diets
you need you need the diet to um reduce
the glucose uh improve uh reduce
systemic inflammation and then you use
specific drugs that will target
simultaneously the glucose and glutamine
pathways you know i i hate to say it
uh it's also it's a very embarrassingly
simple disease
uh we have just made this thing into a
massively complicated problem
when when the cells can't or they need
energy without energy the cell can't
grow they're getting their energy from
two metabolites glucose and glutamine
they can't survive without that now the
question is how you target glucose and
glutamine without harming the normal
cells of our body and that's why when we
transition individuals over to
nutritional ketosis the ketone body is
an alternative normal cells can shift
from glucose to
ketone bodies the tumor cells are locked
into this fermentation ketones cannot be
fermented they require oxidative
phosphorylation if the ox foss is
defective in the tumor cells then the
ketone bodies are not usable by the
tumor cell so you marginalize those
cells and their and their constellation
of genetic mutations that they are there
are in the nucleus prevent those cells
from making the necessary adaptations uh
to to to use alternative fuels so the
mutation collection prevents them they
become far less resilient like our
normal cells evolved over millions of
years to be quite versatile
using a variety of different fuels the
cancer cell is locked into fermentation
therefore the strategy to manage this
disease is not terribly complicated you
just have to do you have to use a
treatment program that knows how to
design
uh in a staged way
uh
the gradual health making the rest of
the body healthy while you gradually
degrade the tumor cells that are
dependent on a fermentation metabolism
so you put all that together and you
have a nice strategy
to manage cancer
so let's say someone goes 100 hardcore
pure ketogenic diet
just pure proteins zero carbs just fats
and proteins 100
i mean is there any way for the cancer
to grow through that
oh yeah you're not targeting the
glutamine
so um if you don't target the glutamine
that's the energy so you you cancer
cells can be slowed down by the diet you
just mentioned but the
uh
you know i'm really surprised there are
some people that we talked to who
actually have managed their cancer using
what you just said
um which is fun which is striking to me
because i i i don't know how they're
getting around the glutamine block doing
that but the but the strategy for more
effective management would be to do that
kind of a a program with a drugs that
works uh uh we need drugs to really
target that glutamine metabolism and you
know we use certain there's some uh you
know off what they call uh repurposed
drugs off patent drugs like 60 oxy nor
leucine don d-o-n
and there's a variety of other glutamine
inhibitors but they alone
used without the rest of the the package
are also insufficient in managing uh
effective management
it's a simple thing you transition the
body to non-fermentable fuels and then
you simultaneously go after the
availability of glucose and glutamine
this will eliminate the tumor without
causing toxicity to the rest of the body
regardless of the type of cancer that
the person might have
are there any studies that you know
about that are that are looking at pure
ketogenic diets with a glutamine
inhibitor
um
no i mean i haven't seen it yes you know
everybody's doing this thing half-assed
they're using either a diet by itself or
they're using drugs by themselves
um nobody's putting the package together
as far as i can see
um you know it's the it's the strategy
of clinical trials you know you have to
know what your drug is doing or you
can't interfere with something you know
the bottom line is how are you going to
keep these people alive i mean that
should be the end point not you know
whether your drug is working in a
certain way or not i mean let's be
honest i mean we're we're putting these
people at risk by doing these things
that are that are not complete you know
you have to have a strategy that's going
to be just like i said you've got to use
glucose and glutamine targeting
simultaneously while transitioning the
body over to a non-inflammatory state
using fuels that the tumor cells can't
use no one is doing that anywhere as far
as i know
i mean it's kind of crazy it seems
seems
just intuitive and based on what you're
saying it seems like the easiest least
toxic thing to do
um i would imagine hopefully someone can
kind of jump on that
you know the reason why right
because it's
because cancer makes money
yeah
it's a it's a it's a unfortunately it's
an obscenity but it's true
and until and as i said until there's a
business model
that can that can generate the revenue
uh from this uh strategy it's not likely
that we're going to have any major
advances but you know as i said i think
that might be the biggest stumbling
block to the management of cancer is how
how can you how can you uh generate
enough revenue to make up for the lost
things that you're going to be doing and
then and so it's a business it's a
business decision
that's sad yeah but it's true and yeah
and the poor patients are being
sacrificed as the result of uh not
moving in this direction
now i want to briefly talk about you had
a hypothesis a couple years ago about a
press pulse therapeutic strategy can you
briefly tell us about that
yeah well that's basically
um
i've touched upon a number of things and
i picked up that concept from aarons and
west these guys are paleobiologists and
they they were trying to study the how
we had these mass extinctions of
organisms on our planet uh that that
have been part of our um
various evolutionary epochs
and they said the mass extinction
occurred when you had a chronic stress
on populations
coupled with an acute um
pulse like a meteor strike or some
phenomenally drastic thing so the stress
will eliminate the weak the lame the
organisms that are already struggling
uh but it keeps the stronger ones around
and then when you have this pulse you
eliminate those as well so taking that
concept to the cancer field what we
decided to do is we is we put the
patients into an extremely healthy
physiological state using uh nutritional
ketosis
and then once the body starts to get
into a non-inflamed state then we go
after uh we put the pulses on there and
they are drugs that will specifically uh
eliminate uh hold out cells cells that
might be a little bit more uh resilient
to these treatments so first you get rid
of the weak ones you change the whole
physiology of the body over to put more
pressure on the tumor cells and then the
drugs which may have been which would
have been used at the beginning and
maybe not having so much therapeutic
benefit now become uh really powerful uh
inhibitors of cancer and you do this
slowly uh but surely over a period of
time so you don't go in there like a
bull in a china shop and try to kill all
the tumor cells and damage the whole
body you know you slowly degrade the
tumor while at the same time enhancing
the health and vitality and we what we
see
is when we use this strategy
not only do cancers go away but also
type 2 diabetes hypertension and a
variety of other ailments because a lot
of cancer patients come in there they
have several comorbidities
and as well as dysregulated cell growth
in some part of their body so it's a
whole body approach to managing cancer
so we correct a lot of the different
abnormalities while the tumors are being
degraded through this press pulse
concept and and right now
uh the concept is there the outline is
there what where where where the
frontier is dosage timing and scheduling
how do we time and dosage all of these
different press pulse concepts uh
approaches to make a perfect like we're
working on it right now in the lab uh
what we call diet drug cocktails and uh
these are uh you put them animal or
into a beautiful new metabolic state and
then what is the best timing dosage and
scheduling where the different glucose
glutamine targeting drugs will work
together with the new physiological
state of the body and i'm telling you
man i have never seen some of these
animals on death's doorstep um you know
they'll be dead in a couple of days
recovered to a remarkable state of
health and when this when this is used
in humans in the clinics eventually uh
you're going to see the same thing and
people are going to emerge from cancer
treatment uh with a new sense of uh
physiological health and their tumors
will be for the large part either gone
or in a in a state where they can be
long-term managed
i mean you've been very clear that you
think that the combination of a
ketogenic diet with a glutamine
inhibitor
dose timing all of that you know needs
to be worked out that's clearly what
you're advocating for and it certainly
makes sense based on all of the data
what is your
crystal ball view
on the next 5 10
20 years what what major breakthroughs
in cancer
management do you foresee in the future
well i think the first the first and
most important
break change has to happen that cancers
is a mitochondrial metabolic disease
it's not a genetic disease
so that in itself is an earthquake uh
that in itself would require a massive
paradigm shift just to recognize that
that that what you thought the disease
was is not what it actually is
um so that has to be changed uh you have
to recognize that without energy no
tumor cell can grow therefore it
provides the strategy for you know
targeting the targeting energy
metabolism
um you have to know that the two fuels
the metabolites that are responsible for
this are glucose and glutamine we've
done a big survey we can't find another
amino acid that can replace glutamine
and glucose is is the primary sugar that
drives this
uh people need to know that ketone
bodies are what we call a super fuel uh
they enhance the delta g prime of atp
hydrolysis you have to know why ketone
bodies are part of the of the solution
um
you also people need to know that when
patients are put into these new
metabolic states uh delivery of drugs to
the targeting cancer is so much more
improved we showed that uh ketogenic
diets or low carb high fat diets
facilitate delivery of drugs right
through the blame brain barrier into geo
into gdm
um you know trying to get these drugs
out to target has been a real problem
not when the body is is converted over
to metabolic
ketosis
um so yeah you have that the other
problem that you have to to solve this
cancer problem is you have to have a
re-educational program in in the medical
schools i mean they need to know the
power of nutrition and they need to know
how drugs and diets work together to
manage their patients i think the goal
for all physicians is how do i keep my
patient healthy how do i have him her
recover from a debilitating disease
without without toxicity there's a
training period people need to know why
are we studying all these gene mutations
when they're largely irrelevant
downstream epiphenomena when the real
issue is a metabolic problem
and of course as i've mentioned you have
to have a business model because this is
not going to move forward until someone
can figure out how to make a book on it
you know that's natural you know you're
going to do that um but i think that um
you know i'm i i know that if what i
know right now with the pro with the
appropriate training and reconfiguration
we could drop the cancer death rate uh
by 50
within five or ten years you know right
now we have over 1600 people a day in
the united states dying from cancer
um in china it's 8 000 people a day
dying from cancer this comes from the
data from the american cancer
society okay anti-smoking campaigns
reduce lung cancer but if a person has
lung cancer
the probability of long-term survival is
is just as bad today as it was decades
ago
no major advance in glioblastoma
management 100 years i mean what's going
on with that i mean think of all the
advances in science and technology in
the last 100 years that we're still
dealing with a 15 month survival for gbm
i mean this is nuts uh we have the
capacity right now to make huge advances
and keeping people alive in a much
healthier state it's just that there has
to be a will and it has to be a
recognition uh to do this and these are
the obstacles but i think every one of
them is an approachable and solvable
problem it just takes the will
of the patients and the society to come
to realize this and then we're going to
see major advances and i think this
cancer will be put in its rightful place
it's just one more kind of a thing you
got to deal with but you can deal with
it without too much toxicity if you know
what you're doing
i mean what an amazing interview i'm
going to wrap it up because i know that
you're super busy i could honestly talk
to you all day it's i can tell you as
someone who treats cancer i was not well
versed on this on this theory until
recently so i agree with you i think
that what we need to do is one
educate medical students educate doctors
really switch the paradigm like you said
from focusing on genetics over to
metabolic and i think that's something
that is not known to the vast majority
of physicians let alone let alone
patients
i think focusing on nutrition is
something that we need to do even in
childhood i think children and young
adults need to know more about nutrition
not just by the way you look but by the
way you feel and how healthy you are and
i think that all of that put together
you've really
simplified cancer instead of being this
crazy disease that has a million
different etiologies it's just a
metabolic disease it's tied into diet
it's tied into nutrition
and it sounds like there's a very
straightforward pathway to control it
and to treat it so you know we're
obviously going to keep educating here
thank you so much for your time
professor seyfried unbelievable work
you're doing all right you should should
be super proud it's it's very
inspirational well thank you very much
and i and i think your your shows will
will help facilitate this knowledge
spreading the knowledge around and
things will change it just will take
some time
absolutely thanks again for your time
really appreciate it okay have a great
weekend yeah you too thank you very
much care